Today I'm going to talk about
programming for a bench press so that
you can have the best bench press
possible. But before we do that, I'm
going to start with my session and we're
doing spotto pressing 165 kg for six
reps. Today is week four of my program
and I'm going to do that before we talk
about the program. Let's do it.
It was actually good,
but
I just didn't trust the last rep cuz it
slows down. You know what I mean? It's
like exponentially. It's not like a
linear reduction in energy. It's an
exponential reduction in energy because
when I do my normal bench press, it's uh
yeah, you can you can predict the
gradual fatigue from rep to rep, but
this one, every rep is a lot more
fatiguing than what a normal bench press
is. So, I got five reps of that. Could I
have gotten six? Well, I didn't think so
at the time. I'm sure if I look back,
I'll look at the fifth rep and go, there
was definitely another rep in there. But
anyway, it doesn't really matter. That
was the final week of the program. The
idea of it is to do just one top set,
and that's what that was. A lot of
people have asked a few different things
about percentages and how do I calculate
the percentages based on when I change
from a wide grip to a mid- grip to a
close grip to a spotter press and all
the different variations. And sometimes
what I like to do is test it myself. So,
I just did five reps on 165 mid-grip
spotto press. Maybe I can test it out
with
a competition style bench press straight
after that. So, we can kind of compare
apples with apples. Of course, that one
set fatigued me a little bit. I wouldn't
say it fatigued me too much because I
left a rep in reserve arguably, but
well, whatever the argument is, I didn't
go to absolute fail, that's for sure.
So, I'm going to give myself a little
bit of rest, like 8 minutes rest, and
then I'll I'll refill it. So, I'll go
125, 145, and then I'm going to go 165
kg. And I'm going to do as many reps as
I can with a comy bench press just to
see the exact difference between the
two. And that's how I'm always
calibrating and understanding the
difference between the different
variations of each of the lifts. So,
let's do that next.
[Music]
I thought
I thought I'd be at about eight.
That's okay.
All right. Well, there you go.
So, I would say thank you. I would say I
should be at about 170 for eight. So, my
shoulders been playing up and that's a
little bit down. I'm not too unhappy
because yesterday I did my heavy squat
as well, which takes away from my bench
press day. But either way, I think 165
for eight.
That shows you that there's a three rep
difference between my spotto press
midgrip and my arch
without the pause and the you know the
the hover the spotter. So So the spotto
press is where you you stop the bench,
you stop the bar about a centimeter or
so above the chest. Now that's harder
because I have to decelerate the weight
and change direction. Whereas when I
rest it on my chest like that, my chest
stops it. So I don't have to decelerate
and it changes direction for me. So
that's why it's a lot easier. But either
way, those are the things that I like to
do to show that the spotto press mid
grip is a harder variation. There's no
doubt about that. I'm going to do some
accessory exercises which are going to
be pretty easy. This is my D load week.
If you understand what I do every fourth
week of my program, I maintain
intensity. So that's my D load. I
maintain intensity or maintain the
logical incremental increase. So I did
four-week block 150 55 60 65. So on week
one I did 150 kg for sixes. The next
week was 155 for sixes. Got all those.
Last week was 160 and I failed the last
rep. So I did 665 and then today I
thought oh we'll try one all out set.
Anyway, I managed five reps. So, when I
say I failed, I didn't actually attempt
the rep, but I would say I would have. I
even looked back at the sixth rep. I
don't know what you think, but I looked
back at it and I thought, you know what,
that was a good call that I stopped the
fifth rep, I slowed down a lot. Not
because, and not intentionally, it was
hard. And that's what happens. It's like
it looks easy, but it's not. And then on
that last rep, so every rep is getting
it's like it just gets a lot harder. So,
I would have missed that sixth rep and
it was a good call by not attempting it.
So, now I'm going to do accessory
exercises uh first and then I'm going to
talk to you guys about how to program
your bench press so that you can have
big pecs, big muscles, and a big bench
press. Of course,
>> going to watch your reps.
>> Yeah, why not?
Why not?
Yeah. So, something that I know that a
lot of people will be saying is on the
spotter press I was locking it out. Here
I wasn't. Um, correct. I always bench
press my rep work with a not complete
lockout. Why? Because the complete
lockout makes my makes me bring my arms
further across my body and it takes my
shoulder blades into protraction. And
when I'm doing high rep sets and my
shoulder blades protract, protract,
protract, you're unable to retract
because you're laying on a bench that
stops your shoulder blades from moving
freely. So what I like to do with my
high rep sets with competition style is
is pin my scaps and and just do, you
know, like 95% lockout. I don't know
what you would call that. however many%
that I I miss. Of course, the last rep I
completely lock out
and that's what allows me to get high
rep working and then good volume and
maintaining that shoulder position. So,
what are some of the negatives
logically? And I'm sure some of you will
think the same thing. Uh is it going to
create a weakness in my lockout?
Maybe if I don't do additional tricep
work. Um, and if I don't do like I just
did the whole bunch of spotto pressing
where it was a complete lockout because
the retraction of the scapula didn't
matter as much. So I I do full lockouts
and when I do dumbbell work I do full
lockout. So it's not as if I neglect it
completely. But when I'm doing my rep
work with my com style bench press I do
you know and my best bench press in
competition is 240 kg in the 110 class
and I did lock it out and I didn't have
a problem with that at all. And same
with Eric Spot. He created the spotto
press. Well, it was named after him
where he didn't touch his chest on the
bench press and people would say that's
a partial rep as if he was cheating, but
then he'd go on to be the best bench
presser in the world. So, these are the
little techniques that might seem like
they're cheating, but um also maybe not.
My priority is maintaining position.
Now, what I'm going to teach you guys
with programming, a question that a lot
of people kind of ask when I give my
programming advice is, well, how would I
modify it to suit me? You know, you're
at your level of strength. So, for me, I
am quite a strong bench presser. I have
been doing it for 20 years. And does
that relate to a beginner? Yes and also
no. And I always say, don't look at
your, you know, the people that you're
looking up to and say, I'm training the
way that they train because they're
good. Look at the way that they trained
to get to where they are. And that's
what I'm going to tell you guys is how I
trained to get to where I am. When I
first started benching, I was 16 years
old. So, for my 16year-olds that are
watching this, um, compare yourself to
me. And I love this. I was benching 30
kilograms for eight reps and that was my
limit. I wanted more but I wanted more
because all my friends were doing 40 kg
for eight reps. So I thought, you know,
I can do that no problem. Um, and I
wasn't able to. And it was really
humbling experience for me because my
friends were stronger than me. And I
guess that that's something that lit the
fire for me to have a better bench press
because at that age I just thought I
hate being last so I'm going to not be
last anymore. So I just bench pressed
every day. When I say every day, every
training session that I had, I'd go to
the gym and it was bench press. And
that's not the best way to train. It's
the best way to train your bench press
if you're an absolute beginner with a
high frequency because I got from 30 kg
to not quite 100. It was around the 90
kg mark uh within my first year of
training. I was very small like you know
I was a same height as what I am now 179
cm and I weighed about 65 kg. Okay.
Today I weigh about 103 kg. So, I was
very small, not genetically gifted. Um,
but anyway, so I trained, you know,
probably about three times a week of
bench. Three to four times per week is
how many times I'd train. And all of
those sessions, I would start with the
bench press and then I'd do the rest of
my body after that, which was never
legs. It was arms, maybe some lat pull
downs. Really not intelligent way of
training. And that was the first year of
my training. Anyhow, I stopped training
for a couple of years. And I came back
when I was I think I was 19 years old
actually. So, I did a whole lot of
nothing in that time. Anyway, I came
back at the age of 19 and I kind of knew
how to build my bench press back and
that was to just bench press every
session and the frequency at that time
was, you know, three times per week and
I built back pretty quickly. Anyway, I
don't want to talk so much about my
absolute amateur days. Like those are
things that I would look at and I'd say
don't do that. I've got different
approaches for for training absolute
beginners. And in my opinion, you better
like I didn't have a great physique
then. I was just decent at bench press
and I was not decent at anything else. I
didn't train legs and I I kind of gave
very low time and effort into any other
part of my body. So, that's not what I
want to talk about. I want to talk about
when I started actually training
properly. I was 19 years old. That's
when I started training with my brother.
His name's Cameron Orb. Shout out to
you, bro. I was skinny and he was
jacked. And I said to him, "You need to
train me. I need to be jacked like you."
And uh so I started training with him
and I was doing four days a week of
training. Anyway, so this was the time
when I really took everything seriously.
I learned all I could about training.
Not necessarily the best um teachers.
Well, Arnold Schwarzenegger Encyclopedia
was my first teacher. You know, I
followed his program and it got me so
far. But then when I started taking it
seriously with my bench press, the best
way to build strength for my bench
press, this took me from 140 kg to 180
kg in a very short time period. And to
do this, I actually had to injure my
leg. That was unintentional obviously,
but I injured my leg. So, I wasn't able
to do squats or lower body exercises.
So, I loved training. I was actually a
personal trainer and I didn't want to
not train. So I just thought, you know
what, I'm going to try and bench every
day again. So I bench pressed four times
a week competition style and that got me
from yeah 140 kg to 180 kg. It was like
within the year. So a lot of the times
when I'm talking about how often should
you bench press, I give a general
recommendation of two times per week.
And that's not because it's the best
way. It's because I think that's a great
way of training upper body. It's optimal
to allow you to give equal emphasis on
the rest of your body. Right? So I train
4 days a week. Uh, so does Thor Bjönson,
the world's strongest man. So if it's
good enough for us, I'd say it's good
enough for most people. Is it the best?
Well, it depends on your journey. The
fact is we've got seven days to play
with, right? We've got Monday to Sunday
and a lot of people have jobs and other
commitments and you still need to
recover. So if you train all day long
for 7 days, you're not going to get
enough recovery. And so you need to
factor all of that in. But let's just
say you wanted to specialize in your
bench press, I would say on average,
three times a week is where you would
start. And I would always recommend that
you're training your lower body as well.
So unless of course you got some type of
an injury, which is what I had, I would
say if you're if you're capable of
training your whole body and you do care
for your whole body, but you want to
emphasize your bench press, I think 3
days a week is the sweet spot. You know,
there's lots of different training
programs, but I'm going to talk about
how you can split up your training from
phase to phase to phase instead of just
coming in and benching every day like I
used to do, which worked, but there are
better ways of doing it. Now, what I'm
going to talk about, so on my last
episode, I spoke about squats and how to
program for a squat. Sorry, two episodes
ago, there's a few episodes ago I gave
here this link right here. I'll put that
in. That'll solve that argument. I spoke
about how to build a squat. And someone
wrote in the comment section, can you
please do that for the bench press as
well? And I thought, of course, I can.
Why not? So, you would follow the same
principles, which is to maximize your
strength, you have a greater potential
of building strength if you have more
muscle mass. So it makes sense to build
a lot of muscle and then you have a
greater potential to turn that big
muscle into strong muscle. So this is
the idea of periodization. So that was
just like one small snippet of that. But
basically what you want to do with
long-term planning is over the long-term
plan we want to start with higher volume
and more variation. And then as we get
closer and closer to let's just say
competition date or you don't always
have to compete. Most people don't
compete but it's great to test your
strength every now and then. And I say,
you know, maybe every 16 weeks or so.
So, you're testing your strength every,
you know, three times a year. I think
that that's great. Don't test every
week. So, the idea of retesting isn't
because testing makes you stronger.
Testing allows you to see if what you've
been doing is working. So, I think if
you test every week, you're not going to
get stronger, but you have to test
sometimes to be able to give yourself a
gauge of what you're doing that it's
improving. Either way, 16week blocks.
And this is how we're going to set it
out. The first phase in all of my
training, what I like to do, I know in
my last squat episode I spoke about
starting with a hypertrophy phase. I'm
going to go a little bit before that.
What I like to consider before a
hypertrophy phase is a movement literacy
phase, which is where you're refining
techniques. Okay, what techniques? The
techniques that I just did there. So,
the highest priority when it comes to
your long-term success is execution of
exercise, the way that you move. If your
lifting technique sucks, your program
sucks. even if that program was written
by me. Right? Now, I think I'm pretty
good at writing programs, but that
program won't work if the execution is
incorrect. Right? So, the highest
priority is understanding movement. So,
a lot of the times people say do lots
and lots of reps so you can refine the
movement. You know, I don't disagree
entirely, but I do partially. What I
would prefer that you do is instead of
doing lots and lots of reps to refine a
technique, do lots of quality reps. And
the way that we do that is we do a lower
rep set in our first phase where we're
focusing on learning how to move
correctly. So something that I find is
when we're doing complex exercises like
a bench press and especially like a
squat or a deadlift, all those barbell
free weight movements, they're quite
complex and if you do high rep sets on
those, there's it tends to be a lot of
technical breakdown in the later reps,
right? So I like to keep the learn to
move phase kind of at around the five to
six rep range. So, in the first phase,
the the focus is on learning how to
move, right? So, I would say in the
first four weeks of your 16week block,
learn to move. I would bench press two
times per week with this competition
style, right? That's what I'm going to
get you to test with at the end of the
16 weeks. So, you start with two times a
week with that technique. You're
refining that pattern. And on the third
day, this isn't like a bodybuilder where
we're focusing on specific muscle
groups. We're focusing on a bench press
and building our bench press strength.
And in my opinion, if you want to have a
strong bench press, you have to have
strong joint actions in all angles, push
and pull. Right? So, something that I've
also got is a very strong overhead
press. For context, my best overhead
press strict is 175 kg. We can put that
in. It was an ugly rep, but I pressed it
with my legs locked out. Overhead, ugly,
dropped it, whatever. But I I locked it
out over my head. 175 kgs. Now, that's
pretty damn strong. And that's not
because I prioritize my shoulder press.
I prioritize pushing and pulling on all
angles with equal emphasis because I
wanted my bench press to be as good as
possible. Right? So, that's what I think
if you have a weak link anywhere, we're
as strong as our weakest link. So, I
would say in the first phase, five to
six reps, two days of benching like
this, and one day of shoulder pressing
as the main exercise, right? So, three
days a week, let's just say three sets,
five to six reps. Okay? So that's that's
perfect for technique acquisition.
Accessory exercises I recommend if
you're doing barbells to start the
session, do dumbbells as a secondary
exercise. Which angle's the best? The
answer is all of them. One day do flat,
another day do incline, another day do
high incline. Right? So all of them are
good. And on that phase, you know,
dumbbells don't suit the five to six rep
range. I would say 8 to 10 rep range.
Okay? So that's the first phase. I would
actually not do that three times a week.
On one of the days, I would focus on arm
work. Right? So, two days dumbbells. So,
after your bench press, I would do a
dumbbell press. And after your shoulder
work, I would do direct arm work. That's
what I would do in the first phase. Now,
here's the next thing that I would do.
If you're doing three days of benching,
on those same days, I would do the pull
pattern as well, right? So, how many
minutes rest do you rest for your bench
press? Uh, for me, I'm quite strong. So,
today I was resting 8 minutes between my
sets. But when I started, I wasn't. And
when you're focusing on strength and
movement, I would say four to five
minutes rest between sets is not so bad.
Now, you've got two choices. You can
either do the bench press and wait four
to five minutes before you do the next
set. Or you can wait 2 minutes, perform
the opposing muscle group, so a row or a
lat pull down, and then wait two more
minutes and come back to the bench
press. So it's an equal amount of rest
from bench to bench, but you're now
doing twice the amount of work cuz
you're doing the opposing muscle groups
as well, right? So that's how I would do
pretty much all of this up until the
peaking phase, right? I'll explain the
peaking phase when we get there. So you
go a bench press, you know, three sets
of five to six, and then you superset
that. You wait two minutes between the
supersets with a latap pull down or a
row. Okay, same with your shoulder
press. You superset that with a latap
pull down or a row and then you're doing
your accessory exercises afterwards. Now
that's our learn to move phase. Then you
know now we've refined the technique.
What we want to do is figure out how to
build the most muscle, right? So the
best way to build muscle is increase the
volume slightly. It's not a matter of
like the more volume the better. Like
some research shows us that volume and
hypertrophy has a dose response. So
hypertrophy means increasing in cell
size. the more volume you do, the better
it carries over to muscle growth. And
the research on that, you know, a lot of
people say, you know, there there is a
point where you're doing too much
volume. And I agree, but there is
research saying it was like a 52 set
study on quadriceps, which I discussed
on the quad day. And there was a group
of lifters, you know, one group did 52
sets, another group did less, another
group did less. The group that did 52
sets saw the best gains in quadricep
hypertrophy. So more volume is linked
with more hypertrophy, right? So that's
what we want to factor in. So before we
go into the high volume phase, we're
learning how to move so that we can do
that high volume phase with the correct
technique. So now that we've got that,
the next thing we need to factor in the
first phase was learn to move. The next
phase is a hypertrophy phase. What you
want to consider when you're further
away from peaking is variation. Right?
So this is where from the whole 16we
block, I would include one competition
style bench press. But further out,
except for the learn to move phase,
further out, we want to do more
variation exercises. So I would do
things like incline presses, all angles
actually. So incline, decline, dips,
machines. Use those accessory
hypertrophy exercises to complement your
bench press. So you're doing one bench
press session and the other pressing. So
you're still doing three days a week.
You're pressing on all angles and that's
the rep range that you consider. The
research talks about rep range um you
know talking about rep ranges are quite
flexible when it comes to muscle
building as long as you are taking the
movement pretty close to failure. So
with the learn to move phase, I would
recommend leaving more reps in reserve.
Don't take it to failure because your
movement is going to break down.
Hypertrophy phase, your technique is a
little bit better. Now I want you to
start thinking about pushing a little
bit harder and taking those movements
closer to fail. So instead of doing, you
know, five to six reps with really high
emphasis on perfect technique, you're
now doing, you know, 8 to 12 rep range,
which is a nice sweet spot for building
muscle. And you're taking those
movements a little bit closer to
failure, right? So your technique is
better. So the technical breakdown won't
be as bad. Additionally, I would
recommend using machine work where
there's very little chance of making a
technical breakdown because you're in a
machine and you're in a guided track and
you know you're not like if you take it
to fail and you're exhausted, you can't
really fail the technique. You're kind
of stuck doing the same technique. So
that's why machine work is really really
good for apertrophy. So I do tons of
that in the second phase. Do that for
four weeks. Same layout, three days a
week of pressing. Do press with a pull.
You're doing a high reps. You're taking
it close to failure. You're only
benching once per week. And on the other
two days, you're doing some type of a
shoulder press, some type of an incline
press, maybe some dips, lots of
dumbbells, lots of variation, lots of
arms as well. High reps, take it closer
to fail the next phase. So that's the
first eight weeks, the next four weeks.
So this is going to be weeks 9 to 12.
Now we start thinking about getting that
muscle that we've built nice and big and
coordinated to nice big coordinated and
strong in our strength phase. So now we
gradually reduce the reps, but we also
gradually increase the specificity. In
the hypertrophy phase, we did lots of
different variations of the bench press.
In the strength phase, I want to make
sure that you're doing at least one
variation of the bench press, heavy. And
I would still do a second day of
competition style bench press, but
light. So, with the strength phase, high
frequency works. However, that doesn't
mean try as hard as you can multiple
times per week. I would do a heavy day.
So, for the strength work, we're doing
something like, you know, my optimal rep
range for strength is 3 to six rep
range. So, I do one day of three to six.
another day, I would kind of bring the
reps a bit higher. So, like six to
eight, even in the strength phase, but I
would use a lower RP, so we're getting a
little bit more volume in. Don't take it
to absolute fail because we still need
to factor in recovery. And then on the
third day, I would still do some type of
a shoulder press accessory or even an
incline press, something like that. So,
there's always going to be a third day
of some slight variation. We could even
do a third day of like close grip bench
press or or spotted press the way that I
just did that. Okay? But now we're
focusing on lower reps, higher
specificity, and lower volume. So when I
say lower reps, and I say lower volume,
I say it's two different things. Well,
it kind of is because we need to
calculate the total amount of sets.
Research tells us we should be doing
anywhere between 10 to 20 sets per
muscle group per week to optimize our
results in hypertrophy. But it tells us
that we should be doing less sets than
that if our goal is to optimize strength
because as we're lifting heavier, it's
also more fatiguing and we need time to
recover from that. So in our strength
phase, I want you to think about so
there's research and I'm going to quote
the same research. Dr. Ray and
colleagues in 2003 suggests that you
should be doing 2 to three days per week
of frequency, four sets per session.
Right? So that means if it's 2 to three,
that means it's either 8 to 12 sets per
movement pattern per week. Right? So
which one should you do? Eight or 12?
Well, the stronger you are, the lower
end that should be. So for me, I'm doing
about eight. But, you know, coming up to
getting to this strength, so up until I
got to about 180 kilogram bench press, I
was doing about 12 hard sets per week
split over multiple days. I told you
four days, but that's when I wasn't
factoring in lower body. I want you to
factor in more lower body. So, 3 days a
week, 12 hard sets a week split into
three days. So, that's our strength
phase. You know, because we're going
heavy, we're doing a little bit less
volume. I want you to do a little bit
less volume in our accessory exercises
as well. don't do as much taking those
movements to fail, focusing on muscle
building. You want to focus on muscle
maintenance while we're building our
strength. So recovery comes into play.
And if all you're doing is taking
everything to absolute fail in this
phase, while you're doing really, really
heavy weights, it's going to be pretty
hard to recover from. So in our
hypertrophy phase, especially the
accessory exercises, work towards an RP
9 to 10. on the strength phase, work
towards an RP on our accessory exercises
of kind of like sevens, eights, and then
right towards the end, maybe we can test
out like on the end of the day, like the
last set of the day, do an AM wrap. So,
as many reps as possible and take that
last set to fail. So, don't take every
set to fail, right? So, be strategic
about how hard you're pushing. Leave
more reps in reserve. So, that's weeks 9
to 12. Then, we go from weeks 13 to 16.
That's where we peak. Right? Now, here's
the next gift for you. If you didn't see
it, click the link here and I give you a
free peaking program for deadlifts. Was
it just for deadlifts? Yeah, it was. But
you can follow the same principles for
your bench press. And this is the way
that I did it. Peing your strength is
about reducing volume to minimize
fatigue. All right? So, if you're
testing your strength all the time,
you're probably fatigued all the time
and you're not able to represent your
true level of strength because fatigue
masks fitness. So, what we want to do in
our peaking phase is reduce our fatigue.
The biggest contributor to fatigue is
volume. So what we want to do is
gradually reduce our volume in this
phase and increase the amount of weight
on the bar and the specificity. So what
we want to do is teach our body the
skill of lifting a heavy single. So what
does that mean? Right? I'll tell you
what it means. If all you do is like
eight rep range, 8 to 10 rep range,
which is how I used to train, you know,
8 to 12 rep range like a bodybuilder,
and then every now and then test my one
rep max. I don't know the skill of doing
a one rep max. It feels completely
different if you're doing sets of 8 to
10. and how that weight feels in your
hand to pump it out is very different to
when someone unracks a heavy single.
It's very very heavy in your hands and
the way you have to prepare yourself for
that is very very different. So the
peaking phase is about gradually
preparing us to handle those one rep max
loads. Okay. So the way that we do that
in the program is we gradually reduce
the amount of sets from week to week. So
week one, so put this up here in the
graphics please Mr. Video editor. Week
one is 4x4 on a competition bench. Week
two is 3x3. Next week two by two and
then the peak week one set of one that's
where you peak.
>> Is it all in competition style?
>> When I say competition style my
competition style is that arch. So
competition style that's because I do it
in a competition just means the heaviest
technique for you which I recommend is
this. I recommend this is the best
technique to shift the heaviest loads.
But a lot of people moves differently to
each other. Everyone has different body
shapes and proportions and levels of
mobility. So the way that you might
perform a heavy single might look
different to mine and that's fine.
That's the technique that I want you to
practice in this phase. Okay? So that's
the first phase in our learn to move.
We're practicing the heaviest technique.
And in the last phase, we're using that
heaviest technique. Okay? So that's what
we're doing with our peak. So we're
gradually reducing the amount of sets
every single week. 4x4, 3x3, 2x two, one
by one. And we're doing that on the
accessory exercises as well. So the next
thing we want to do is reduce the amount
of accessory exercises that we're doing
because that contributes to more
fatigue. So, what you want to do is not
really take those accessory exercises to
fail anymore. I still want you to factor
in a balanced approach to your training.
So, my accessories after heavy bench
press would be shoulder pressing. So, I
want to make with dumbbells. I want to
make sure I'm still strengthening the
vertical push plane as well as rowing
and pull downs as well. So, I'm
continuing with those, but I'm reducing
the proximity to failure. So, I'm not
taking those to absolute failure anymore
to make sure that I'm not accumulating
so much fatiguing volume. So the last
week where you're doing one by one, you
know, you could do that program with
every exercise, right? So 4x4 on squats,
3x3 on squats, 2x2 on squats. So
everything on the same week. It gets
hard if you're testing everything and
it's probably preferable if you kind of
split it up, but most people in a
powerlifting competition do their squat
bench and dead. And you can kind of
loosely do all of it on that same
program. So follow that same rep range.
Anyway, it's pretty long-winded. I hope
you're following. Just so that you know,
I do this for a living. I charge people
money for these programs and the
knowledge and it's yours for free. I
want you to understand that. I want you
to take this knowledge and use it if you
like it. I mean, not everyone has to
like me. Not everyone has to like my
opinion, but this is what's gotten me to
the most I've bench pressing comp is 240
in the gym is 250 kg. That's pretty damn
good. So, I'm concurrently bench press
over two times body weight. Recently, I
did 210 kg weighing 103 kg. I'm over a
two times bodyweight bench press, which
is pretty elite. That's pretty damn
good, right? So these are the techniques
that I've used. Just so that you know
the technique that I learned, the way
that I learned this technique was from a
fellow by the name of Kil Sachev, who
used to be the world record holding
bench presser, 335 kg. I'm trying to
emulate his technique, right? So you're
in good company if you use this
technique. Not just because I use it,
but the best in the world uses it as
well. Now, there's other techniques as
well, and if those other techniques work
for you, that's fantastic. But this
technique is pretty damn good. And if
you can get yourself in a position to be
able to do it, then that's what you
should do. Anyway, hope you enjoyed
that. Okay, so let's do a quick recap.
Phase one, learn to move two times a
week, competition bench press, five to
six reps, one time a week, shoulder
press with a barbell, standing. And the
accessory exercises on each of those
days is going to be dumbbells on all
angles, and one day of arms. Second
phase, hypertrophy. One day only of this
bench press. And the other days, you
want to do more variations. So, whatever
those favorite variations are, whether
it's dips, weighted, of course, if
you've got the strength for that,
overhead press or incline press, I'd
probably say more incline press because
you're able to shift a heavier load,
right? But make sure you're doing
accessory exercises that focus on taking
those movements close to failure with
exercises that are suitable for taking
to the So, this is where you're allowed
to use your favorite machine exercises
like machine pressing, shoulder press,
and chest press and all of those. But,
if your favorite is dumbbells, use
those. Like, my favorite is dumbbells
and that's what I use. But I want you to
start thinking about taking those
movements closer to failure. And make
sure every time you do a push, you pair
that with a pulling exercise. That way,
you're getting a balanced amount of
muscularity on the muscles on the front
of your body to the muscles on the back
of your body. The next phase we're doing
strength. I want you to do two specific
days per week of benching. So, you're
increasing the specificity and you're
decreasing the rep range. Right? So, now
you're doing three to six rep range. And
now you're also going to be doing less
variation in your accessory exercises as
well. So this is where I'd say ditch the
machines in this phase and move to free
weights. So dumbbells are more specific
than machines. And I believe that they
are one of the best accessories that you
can do to complement your long-term
bench press journey. So I'm also very
good at dumbbell pressing. It's probably
because I don't really have machines and
I don't really have the option and I've
had a lot of practice at dumbbells, but
I've got that for very good reason. It's
because I believe in dumbbells. So
that's what you're going to be doing in
your strength phase. And then in your
peaking phase, we're going to reduce the
volume and you're going to use exercises
where you need to factor in. So you're
doing a high specificity. So you're
doing at least two days per week of
competition bench press. If you want to
do three, I'd say that's probably even
better. But make sure it's not three
heavy sessions per week. I'd go heavy,
moderate, and a light session per week
of bench press. And then the accessory
exercises, I would factor in structural
balance. So, the accessory exercises are
not taking the movements to fail, but
we're still factoring in dumbbells on
other angles. So, making sure we're
getting our vertical pushing and our
45°ree incline pressing as well and
pairing that with opposing muscle group
as well. So, you're doing your rows,
pull downs, or pull-ups if you're strong
enough to do pull-ups with good
technique. Anyway, so there's my 16we
peak program in a nutshell. I hope you
wrote that down. And that's for free.
And just because it's free doesn't mean
it has no value. This is very high
value. This is how I do my training. And
this is how I think about my training.
Three times per year. So 16week block
and then repeat that process but with
slightly different variations of those
exercises. Repeat that three times a
year for 10 years. So that means you'll
be doing that cycle 30 times in the next
10 years. That is how you get to bench
press 250 kg, maybe more. So that's my
bench press in a nutshell. And just so
that you know, I'm going to reiterate
and I always love to tell people this.
When I was a 16-year-old, I could bench
press 30 kg for eight. That was my start
point. So if you're better than that,
then you're better than me. All right?
So this is kind of like the
encouragement that I like to give people
when they say, "How do you get to that
level?" It's like 10 years, time,
effort, consistency. And it wasn't 10
years for me. It was 20 years, actually.
So that's the formula, and it's yours
for free. Well, not for free. Click like
and subscribe and I'll see you guys next